(Refer Slide Time: 00:14:04)

And interestingly if you basically look at it, this receipt is electronically generated and is
digitally signed. So it doesn’t require any more signature of anybody else, the LIC can in
future confirm that since it is digitally signed by LIC it can be confirm and saying that
this receipt is generated by LIC and you can see the whole details are available for me
here and I can store it for my future reference. This is what we mean by actually a
business transaction and a work flow. As you can see that I am moving from one
database to the other database and in the process actually I am accessing data that is
stored in this organizations databases and doing business transactions with them. And
please remember this is very important because these are business transactions.
At a later point of time, the bank cannot say that it has not paid this amount to LIC and
LIC at the later point cannot deny that I have not received this amount. So there are lots
of issues involved here like the properties of the transaction that we need to ensure saying
that the customer is protected again as double payment. For example if he clicks twice, he
has to be protected saying that this transaction is actually carried out once and not twice
and his money as is available in his bank account is properly reflex this payment. So as
you can see this has become now an integral part, this is one of the business transactions I
could execute this online sitting right now here and you can imagine, it can be done very
late in the night when you realize that you have to pay this premium and with no
intervention of the bank officials with the no intervention of the LIC officials. Since this
data is digitized and exposed, you are able to actually as a customer access all these data
and do this online without any hassles.

And hence this becomes an integral part of our day today life. And hence databases are
an extremely important subject for us in terms of developing these applications and
making them usable by in our day today life by people. Lot of other examples also exists
for example, if you go to clear trip dot com you can similarly make payments and buy
your tickets and do so many other things with respect to booking your reservations and
things like that. So in some sense this course is going to focus you and tell you the
underlining examples or principles in developing these kinds of databases. And what I am
going to do in the next half an hour is to actually show you an example of how I could
have developed this example and what are the different components that are available for
you when you are actually developing these kind of applications.
For this what I am going to do is I am going to take a simple application that we have in
IIT madras and we are going to show how incrementally I can develop a database model
and a database application for this business process within IIT madras. The business
processes actually one of trying to allow people to purchase computer systems and
peripherals by the faculty of IIT madras where there are different vendors who can supply
these peripherals at different prices. So the idea is actually to allow the faculty to be able
to purchase these systems at a very competitive rate and what IIT madras does is actually
it enters into what is called the rate contract with various vendors for a supply of
computer peripherals and computer systems.
Now this process is done every few months to actually take care of the varying rates of
this computer items and the vendors can bid at different points of times and then the best
competitive vendor is chosen for a given computer system. And then that is made
available to all the faculty so that they can use that rate contract system to actually obtain
their necessary computer items without going through any other purchase procedure. And
this is done often to actually allow the systems which keep changing in terms of their
configuration to be brought in to the rate contract system.
Now one of the requirements here is the vendor should be able to quote at regular
intervals into for IIT for various computer system configuration. They should also be able
to see what IIT‘s requirement is and once these things are chosen, the systems are chosen
then they should be made available to the faculty so that they are able to actually choose
whatever systems they need and are able to generate the required papers for purchasing
those systems. Now when we initially had a paper based system, all the vendors used to
quote, supply their quotes on paper and then they used to be personal in our purchase
department who use to enter all the things into a word processing system like Microsoft
word providing a comparative statement of different vendors for this computer
configurations. And so it’s basically file systems that we are using but then lot of
processing, manual processing of entering these data in that which is usually other
problem because this involves a TDS, a typing of the details provided by the vendors and
then circulation of this papers to various members so that they can look at the details and
then choose the systems that are most competitive.
Now the problem in this particular case as we can understand is that which used to take
nearly 3 to 4 weeks minimum for the entire process starting from the vendors quoting to

the selection. It used to take 3 weeks to 4 weeks and used to involve lot of manual
processing by various people and also circulation of large quantity of papers containing
this data two various members involved in choosing these things. So obviously this is a
very good case where one can think of how this whole processing can be improved as a
business case and see how one can bring in an automated processing by choosing
databases as an example of introducing data base systems for automating the entire
business process or work flow from one end to the other end to just show what are the
likely business processes or work flow elements that will be involved in this. I will just
take you to a site which actually gives a first cut requirement of what was developed to
show how this whole thing can be sort of automated in using the database concepts in a
nice way.
