(Refer Slide Time: 00:45:58)

You can see that I have inserted earlier as a guest and quoted 25000 and 18000 as the unit
price and without monitor I have quoted 18000. So that information is reflected here as
you can see here and the default samtel has been picked up and I said vat is extra and that
is also available for me here. Now as far as the work flow is concerned, I can use this
information whatever people have quoted and pick whatever quotations that I want, put
them into the approved quotations for examples for computers. This will basically reflect
the approved quotations for the computers.
Now you can see all the approved data is available in this particular case and then this is
the approved systems for computer systems and that’s how the information can be
organized in terms of your database tables. I can pick the informations from one table and
then you know it can be added on to the other table. All this is what basically are called
transactions. So you are going to look at in this course in detail how transactions operate
on the database system on the underlining data and change the state of the data as it goes.
For example each one of this can be seen to be a transaction for example, one can think
of which are the things that are actually transactions in this particular case.
I am searching through the computer configuration as I have actually shown you earlier.
Now in this particular case I am actually the first level search is not a transaction because
it is just giving me all the fields that I can use for searching. Now you can see once I
come here, this is the point where I choose a specification and once I choose a
specification or a vendor name for example I am actually trying to make a query into the
database. It is at this stage actually it goes and picks up this data from the database table
that I have underneath.
For example these are all the vendors that I have in my system and now once I choose
one more vendor here and I say, let us say I am actually choosing the one of the vendors
that is available here and then submit that thing. It again goes and reads the data from the

database. These are actually called the read only transactions because all that they are
doing is they are just going into the database and reading the information that I have and
then giving me in a convenient form where I can look at it through my browser. So lot of
thing will be happening underneath but then ultimately all that it is required here is to go,
carry the database, get the required information and show this information for somebody
who is asking for that information.
