(Refer Slide Time: 26:43)

For example in this particular case you can see that I am actually accessing the data by
actually saying that I actually need to retrieve the data which matches a particular
specification number and a particular vendor number. So I am actually going into the data
and trying to match the required values and retrieving the data as they match that
particular value that I have supplied.

It’s quite possible that I actually navigate through data which means that I actually
retrieve at one level. For example you can see when actually go with specification
number I am actually retrieving the data at one level. Now we can see these are all the
data that I have as for a specification number is concerned. Now I can say for 5 is what I
am actually choosing which means that I am actually drilling down, I am navigating
using into the database by saying for 5 now I need the information. So I get to the second
level by saying please get the information on 5 for me.
This is what we understand as a navigational query where you are navigating through the
data, has a post to actually retrieving all the information that satisfies a particular
criterion. For example one can say I want to find out all the students who have registered
my database systems course or my paradigm programming course or my grid computing
course or I want to find out for example a further intersection of the sets by saying I want
to get all those students who registered for my paradigm programming course and also
my course on grid computing.
(Refer slide time: 00:27:54)

So in that sense we have various ways we retrieve this data and hence the data model
becomes extremely important, what is the kind of a data model we have becomes
extremely important. And also another interesting fact that we should see when we see
data models is that here is a case where the data is well organized as a table. For example
I have an IIT serial number and have an IIT specification, I have a chipset, have a
company name unit price, unit price without monitor, category thing like this. This is
more like a table organization of the data.
Now lot of information if you see for our business purposes gets very easily organized as
flat tables of this nature and that is one kind of a data model that is extensively used while
storing the data. Their other data models that are possible for example you could have
data models where you have an object where the information could be unstructured

which could mean that you have a field name and you have a corresponding value but
then one field in that particular object could actually point to another object and that
could point to another object. When example for such a kind of data model or real world
data model is for an example, if you want to store the information about maruti 800, what
are all the parts maruti 800 has, it fits more as a object data model because you are going
to specify now what kind of engine maruti 800 has and within that what kind of other
parts that engine has.
So you are going to actually store the information more in terms of objects and the
objects linking each other and that becomes an object data model where you have a flat
model like this, flat table base model is often also called the relational model. And as you
go into this course you will see in detail how the relational model can be used for storing
data and how the relational database system can be used for developing applications that
fit very well into the relational model.
What I have shown here is a simple example of using the relational model for building
this computer rate contract system. I will further go down and show how the relational
model fits in here in terms of developing the application. One of the important things that
we should note down here is for example this also enables the vendors to come in and
give information of what they have directly once I have enabled this database system.
