Database Management System
Prof. D. Janakiram
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Lecture # 1
Introduction to Database Management System
Welcome to this course on introduction to database systems. This is an introductory
course usually taught at the first semester of third year under graduate course, is also
expected that you should have done course on data structures, file systems probably
operating system to better appreciate the concepts covered in this course. Though the
course material may not assume completely that you have understood all the
prerequisites, it could also be done probably independently because wherever the
concepts are required they would have been covered and some difference to the
background material would have been indicated in the appropriate sections. It’s a 42
lecture module of one hour duration and expected to be covered in a semester long
course.
What we will be doing is the two instructors in this course, when myself will be covering
the transacting processing system at the later stage of the course and the other instructor
Dr. Srinath will be covering the initial sections on database design ER modeling and
other basic concepts in the initial sections of the course. What I am going to do in today’s
lecture is give a brief introduction to databases and show the importance of databases
and also in the process introduce some of the basic concepts that we will be covering in
much more depth as we go in to the course.
As the term databases indicates ever since data has been digitized and we are able to store
data in digital form, we see that the mode of data that is being stored by corporates and
other organizations as increased from a few kilobytes over a period of time to now
terabytes. Now databases in that sense have become an integral part of our day today life
in that we actually do lot of transactions, our day today transactions whether it is railway
reservation or it is an airline ticket reservation or withdrawal of money from a bank. In
some sense we are actually working with the underlining databases that this organizations
have. They actually store the costumer data and other information, user information in the
form of databases, in the form of databases where it is accessible by a number of other
entities so that our regular transactions like withdrawal of money from the bank or
reserving a ticket for a train, these are actually are business processes that are working
with the underlining data that is stored in this organizations.
In that sense databases are an essential thing in the business processing world and they
become a key entity in terms of developing these applications, business process
applications. To show what kind of you know, importance database have assumed in
recent times, I will just show you an example of a business transaction in how we
actually work with these business transactions in our day today life. I realized only
yesterday that I actually have to pay a premium for one of my LIC policies and in normal
sense what we do is for paying this policy, the LIC actually sends us an reminder which

is a paper copy posted through the postal mail and normally look at this remainder and
then you will actually send somebody or you go to the LIC branch and try paying the
premium across through your cheque or something bank cheque or other mechanism, if
you carry the cash you will use the cash to actually deposit and then take the receipt back.
All this requires that you physically now move from one place to the other place and
sometimes stand in the queue, if there are more people waiting to do this transaction and
then the process you will really have to spend time in doing this transaction, business
transactions in your day today life. But now with the digitization and the storing of this
data into the digital form into the databases, what you start realizing is that it is possible
for you to actually access this data online and then see that you have to pay a premium
and then see you know if you know actually do this and get on to your bank you know
and then pay the premium online through the bank and also get the receipt of this
[inaudible] transaction back on your email, in your email box which means the whole
transaction can be completed sitting in your office without moving even an inch from
your office and fully finish this entire business transaction. And this is sometimes what
we call as work flow to show how this work flow actually takes place. Let us see how the
scenario which had explained earlier can be managed and I will show you online, how
this whole thing actually can be done.
