(Refer Slide Time: 00:48:53)

But as opposed to this kind of transactions, one can even think of the other kind of
transactions which we saw here. We actually said that one can login as a guest and once
he logs in as a guest now, you can sort of quote for the computer system. Now once he
says that for a particular system, 3 is quoting now and then he give some data here saying
that please take my quote as let us say 12000 and then give the other thing as 8000. Then
I think what we are doing in this process is, we are actually updating our underneath
database.
Once he says quoted what is happening is you will be seeing that the whole quote has
been registered into the database which means that the data has been now been written in
to the database. So these are actually write transaction, they are writing in to my database.
There are some transactions which can go and both do both read as well as write from my
database. To summarize what’s happening here, what we are trying to do is given an
application like this, we have been able to design the underneath tables which are the
database models and store the data in that particular model and have our transactions
which are actually accessing this data and supporting various business processes that I
have in this particular case searching through my rate contract, allowing my vendors to
quote into the database and allowing my faculty to choose and then order the related
computer systems.
So the entire business processing of the data is automated using an underlining database
system and hence database systems become extremely critical in terms of supporting
automating this processes and eliminating manual processing and manual production of
the papers so that the whole work flow gets completely automated and we have a simple
and elegant and nice way of actually handling our business processing systems.
Now what you are going to see in this course as part of this course is you are going to see
how this database design can be done, what is the meaning of transactions and how they
operate and how do they actually maintain the consistency of the underlining data and
provides certain properties when we develop these systems and make it available for day
to day use for the people. So these issues are going to be covered in depth in the next 41
lectures that we have in this course. Thank you.

