(Refer Slide Time: 47:05)

So these are important project monitoring aspect and we use different types of analysis
techniques by representing the project plan in a proper form such as a bar chart or as
activity network. Each development step you will recall, will give information for
tracking the progress of the development. We had said earlier that every step produces
input for the management and this information will be used by the management for
identifying possible bottom necks and the reason for delays if there is any. And we will
enable the management to take corrective action. So project plan allows you to monitor
the project and also control over the progress of the project. Let us now summarize we
have in this particular lesson.
We have we have introduced the software engineering topic. We have looked at the
importance of applying engineering approach to development of large software project.
We define what we mean by engineering. So now we should be very clear how we
benefit by applying an engineering approach to software development. We identified
different types of software processes. We defined a stepwise process definition where the
software methodology consists of multiple steps. We made a very rigorous definition of
what we mean by a software development step. It has entry criteria exit criteria
something specific to be done, some techniques to be employed some documentation, or
some other output to be produced which will be used by subsequent steps. So the essence
of engineering approach is to define a stepwise methodology for carrying out the project.
We saw the waterfall model and other models. We tried to understand their strengths and
their weaknesses. We saw that the waterfall model consists of many steps arranged in a
proper sequence and it identifies many different deliverables which are very important
not only for completing the project but for future maintenance of the project. We saw
then limitations of waterfall model and how other models tried to address those
limitations such as the prototyping model or the spiral model.

And finally we briefly talked about the project planning. Key observations we made here
is that if you do not have a project plan you cannot manage the project. And project
management is actually very important in any large project. And another key point was
that, in order to prepare a project plan it is important that we learn measurement
techniques. We keep historical data, we learned how to effort how to do the effort
estimation. We also understand how the effort is distributed in different steps. So once we
have a good understanding about these issues and we also maintain data about similar
projects that we might have done in the past, we will be able to prepare the project plan
with a great amount of confidence and we will be able to carry out the whole project as
per the plan.

