(Refer Slide Time: 05:00)

Many of these documents will act as a baseline for future reference. In fact some of these
baselines are in the nature of contractual obligations. You may be an independent agency
who is doing software development for a client. So there has to be a baseline, there has to
be a reference which clearly defines what your obligations to the customer are and what
kind of product you should make for him. So such kind of baselines would be produced
in the process of development. And waterfall model defines such baselines or other
deliverables or other documents which are required for subsequent steps. One important
point about this deliverables is that, once a step is completed, the output of that step is
clearly defined in the form of a document, which can be then handed over to people who
will perform the next step. So this model facilitates change of people from step to step.
We are not making it necessary that the same people who have done the analysis should
do the design; the same people who have done the design should do the implementation.
In fact we saw that in the example of civil engineering, we have different people with
different expertise and different people are called upon to do certain specific things at
different points in the life cycle of a project. Same thing happens in a software
development. We define these documents, they are of certain formats, and they are
handed over to the next team who will perform the next step. So there is an
interchangeability of the people and different steps can employ people of different skills
as necessary for that step.
These documents also play an important role for quality assurance, project management
and so on. This methodology is also very widely used. There are some variations
possible, but it is commonly followed because of the natural development cycle on which
it is based. Especially when the requirements can be clearly defined, waterfall model is an
ideal model for development software. So let us see what the different steps are.

