(Refer Slide Time: 40:35)

This is a very important truth that in order to prepare a plan, you must identify the
activities not only qualitatively but quantitatively.

You must learn to measure those aspects which we want to bring under the management
control. So without measurement, planning is not possible. Without planning,
management is not possible. It is very important that first we learn to make
measurements; we measure those aspects of the project which we want to bring under the
control of the management. Make a plan and then perform the management as we
continue with the development. That plan allows progress to be measured. Since it
consists of different activities, as we complete these activities, and as we know the effort
distribution among these activities, we know how far we have progressed and how much
still remains to be done. So when you have the plan you can measure the progress.
We generally prepare this plan before the development begins. As we said earlier it may
be produced along with the analysis or even before the analysis is completed. So we
prepare a plan as soon as we have a good idea about the complexity of the project and we
start getting a good feel of the requirements. Once we have done this, obviously this plan
needs to be constantly updated. We will get management inputs from the development
team. And based on the progress of the work, we may have to update the plans we have
already made. How do we prepare the project plan? What are the important steps that
need to be taken in this? The first important step is that we must estimate the cost and
effort. This is the quantification that we talked about just now.
We need to measure how much effort is involved in carrying out a project. Now this will
naturally be based on the complexity of the project, the scope of the project, productivity
levels of our people, who will be implementing the project, and also other historical data
of similar projects. We will naturally benefit from the previous experiences. So we
should clearly keep a record of other projects performed by us. Understand our
productivity levels and then estimate the effort or the cost for the new projects that we are
undertaking. There are different models available for cost and effort estimation. And in
this course later on you will learn more about these models. Once we have done the effort
estimation, then we select the right development process.
We said earlier that there can be many different types of processes. So you choose the
one which is best suited for task at hand. You define the milestones and you prepare a
schedule. In order to prepare this schedule we of course need to know how the effort is
distributed over the different steps. We had seen one graph where we had shown the
relative effort distribution over different steps in a typical waterfall kind of a
methodology. We should have our own data from our past experiences. So that the
overall effort estimated by us can be distributed over these different steps and we can
prepare a detailed schedule for execution of the project. And then we decide on project
staffing; who will perform the different steps, how many people will be made available,
what are the scheduling requirements, what are the overall calendar time in which the
project needs to be completed. We will also make explicit quality control plans. In the
overall plan, we will schedule reviews and inspections at appropriate points.

