(Refer Slide Time: 07:35)

This diagram identifies different stages in the waterfall model. Let us look at each one of
them briefly. Then later on we will look at each of them in some more details. So the first
step is the system engineering step where you try to understand the overall problem and
identify which of the problem elements are to be handled through the software. It is
possible that certain requirements of the problem may need to be done manually, because
automation may not be possible whereas some other functions will be performed by the
software. So one of the goals in system engineering is to understand the overall context of
the problem. And then identify what would be the responsibilities to be met through the
software. After doing that we undertake the analysis phase. In the analysis phase we
understand the problem domain of the user in more detail. We understand what kind of
information is involved what kind of data is involved, what functions need to be
performed, what are the performance and interfacing requirements. This part is the
analysis part whose purpose is to identify or clearly define the requirements which are to
be met thru the development of the software along with.
In the analysis we also try to carry out project planning either as a part of the same step or
if it is large project, the project planning step may be made as a separate step. And the
purpose of project planning is to identify how we will carry out the project what are the
different steps, what are the deliverables, and what would be the time frame what could
be the resources allocated. That is what a project planning is all about. After the analysis
is done, the next step leads to the design step. In the design step we translate the
requirements into the software architecture when we prepare the database design and so
on. So this is a primarily a technical step and in this step the requirements are translated
into an implementation framework, which will be implemented in the next phase that is
the coding phase, in which the actual programming and implementation will be done.

So you have a design and the design is followed by implementation. In fact as it notes
here the design itself may be divided into two stages called high level design and detailed
design. Again this would depend on the complexity of the task. After you have done the
implementation or carried out the programming phase, when the individual units of the
software are ready, you would get into the next phase called testing phase and integration
phase. In this all the individual pieces of the software are individually first tested, and
then the whole software is put together. The objective is to test first the logic of
individual modules. And then when we put all of them together we want to test their
interfaces, so that they work collectively in a manner in which they were intended to
work. This is the testing and integration phase and this is followed by actual deployment
of the software. Now the software is ready. It is deployed and implemented. The user will
take control and will start using the software.
After the deployment there is an ongoing maintenance phase. In the maintenance phase,
we have to make the necessary changes; if any errors are encountered we will have to
remove the errors. If the software is not meeting the performance requirements we may
have to review the software, maybe we have to go back and look at the design whether
the design can be modified or if there is something else that can be done in order to
improve the performance. So this is an ongoing step which may generally be called a
maintenance phase. And in this phase, the software is either enhanced or is perfected or is
ported to new hardware or new machines. This is an ongoing activity which needs to be
done throughout the life time of the software. These are the different phases through
which a typical software development goes through. We have identified here the main
steps. Each of the steps has certain deliverable. Let us enumerate the different
deliverables which come out in a given sequence when we perform these various steps.
One of the important deliverable is the project plan. We will be carrying out the project
according to the plan that we make. Of course the plan needs to be revised periodically as
we progress through the project. One of the deliverable could also be the feasibility
report. The feasibility report is a report which defines the cost effectiveness of the
approach and the whole software project, whether it is a good investment we are making,
whether the software will be cost effective, whether it will give the kind of benefits we
are expecting from the software.

