(Refer Slide Time: 20:55)

There are some shortcomings in the waterfall model. One of the main criticisms of
waterfall model is that it goes linearly and it assumes that all the requirements can be
clearly defined during the analysis phase. There are many situations where requirements
may not be clearly known. This often happens when there is no manual counterpart for
the problem that we are solving. If a manual counterpart exist, that means the function
business function is already been carried out manually and we are planning to automate
that, then in this case it is easy to define the requirements. But in a situation where there
is no such manual counterpart, when the system is been planned first time, then the
requirements may not be clearly known.
Here is an example. We know that railway reservation has now been automated fully.
Before that, however the manual system existed. We knew what is the role or what are
the tasks involved in the railway reservation. You want to reserve a seat on the particular
train, you may want to cancel it, you may get waitlisted, waitlists have to be arranged and
there is a method for arranging. All those things were already defined as functional
activities. And therefore one can say that as far as the railway reservation is concerned
the manual system existed, and therefore it is possible to clearly define the requirements
in this case. But there can be other examples where there may be no manual counterpart.
For example, say a central bank wants to build a knowledge management system.
It believes that there is so much knowledge that is available with its employees in order
to carry out their day to day task. It would like to capture this knowledge, build a
repository, so that this knowledge is easily available to all other people in the
organization. Now this is something which is quite new and it is difficult to define a SRS
for an application like this. There is obviously some kind of uncertainty involved in terms
of what it will consists of.

So this is clearly one issue when we try to apply for the waterfall model, Which the
requirements may not be clearly known and it may not be possible to carry out analysis
phase once for all and then never come back for revising the requirements. The other
issue is that the waterfall model assumes that the requirements are quite stable and that
they do not change with time. Now, this is not the case because the software development
itself may be a long process, requiring months or years and during this time one cannot
assume that the requirements will not change.
