(Refer Slide Time: 29:49)

Then after we have built the prototype, we evaluate and refine. And if necessary we go
back and repeat this whole cycle. When the evaluation leads to clearly defined
requirements, then we are ready to build the product. And this is done using the standard
engineering approach. So product development takes place once the prototyping cycles
are gone through and we have come to a clearly defined requirements document for the
final product. Now there are of course some limitations to prototyping. There are
situations where prototyping is ideal, but at the same time we need to be aware of these
limitations. First the customer may be happy with the prototype itself and may demand
that the prototype be released for his operations or functions.

This is not really appropriate because the prototype may work in the beginning for some
time, but it may not be maintainable. It may not give the kind of performance and it may
not have the rugged design that is required for sustained operations. The second problem
could be that the process of prototyping. The developer gets so attached to some of the
approach he has used, that he doesn’t try to refine them or look for better way of building
the same functionality. In that case we may actually have difficulties with the quality
performance or other attributes of the software. What it really means is that, we develop a
some kind of blindness towards other possible techniques or better way of doing things,
because whatever way we implemented something in the prototype, we continue the
same in the product.
Good tools need to be acquired in order to do a prototype because we want to complete
the prototype quickly in the minimum cost. So this is an investment we may have to
make which adds to the cost of the project. So one of the problems with prototyping is
that it may lead to a higher project cost and there are other problems that we have just
mentioned. So when we have such difficulties based on the requirements or based on the
situation we might choose some other development methodologies, one that may seem
again obvious is the iterative development.
