(Refer Slide Time: 31:21)

So, these are the corridor where the museum articles are displayed. So, museum art
gallery are something like that. So, may be…
(No audio from 31:36 to 32:05)
So, here we have to place some entries; such that for instance if if a guard sits here, a
sentry sits here. He can see this corridor, this corridor, and make sure that the people are
not stealing things from the art gallery. So, this these three base we can watch watch for,
but under the other hand he cannot see what is happening here. So, similarly if something
is some theft is happening here, he cannot see that. So, you may have to place another
person here. So, that you can watch here, watch here. So, he watches this and this. So,
who will watch this, this only may have to place one here.
So, if you placed one sentry here, one sentry here, and one sentry here. They can together
watch the entire museum. So, (( )) of theft will happen right. So, here this problem can be
modeled as a Graph problem. So, as you can see. So, here this will be converted to a
small vertex, and then this will be converted to a vertex this, this, this. All the corners
will be converted to a vertex. So, I will say I can draw a Graph like this based on this,
and it will look like this. So, this is the... So, I have formed Graph from this art gallery.
So, where these are the places where we can possibly place these sentries. So, there is no
point placing is a sentry here, he can only see here. So, if we see here, he can see anyway

this. So, these are the corners and then these are the corridors along which people move
and the articles are displayed. Now, the question is the same as asking what a minimum
vertex cover here, why minimum because we want the minimum number of is sentries to
placed to minimize the cost.
So, see so here, if we place as we so, we can place one here. So, these we can say select
this vertex. So, as a position for sentry placing the sentry, and our we can select this one.
So, this will say together this one, these two is a covered this is covered, but now this is
not protected. So, if I if I place one here, then you can covered (( )) still it will be this
will not be covered. So therefore, I can place one here; these three this thing. So, so the
minimum number of guards we have to place. So that, the entire museum will be
watched is the same as the the minimum number of vertices, that we have to be selected,
such that every edge has at least one end point in it. So, this is called a minimum vertex
cover.
So, the vertex cover is just a collection of vertices such that every edge has at least one
end point in it; minimum vertex cover is the one which minimizes that cardinality; that
means, we want the smallest vertex cover.
