(Refer Slide Time: 52:35)

So, together what we get is cardinality of MVC of G is equal to n minus alpha of G. So,
in other words, what we are trying to tell is. So, if you remove a minimum vertex cover
what remains is a maximum independent set. Similarly, if we remove a maximum
independent set; what remains is minimum vertex cover. So, this cardinality of the
minimum vertex cover, we can probably denote by say beta of G, because so we are
using alpha of G for the independent set, and we can use say for the minimum vertex
cover a cardinality beta of G. So, then what we get is the cardinality of this, the

cardinality of this, the independent set - maximum independent set and minimum vertex
cover together is the total number of vertices alpha of G plus beta of G is equal to n here n is number of vertices.
So, in this class. So, to summarize we have introduce some basic terms that I used in
Graph theory. So, of case there are many more terms that we have to introduce, but as
the class lectures go on we will talk about more and more things. But I would request the
listener to also go through some introductory chapter from any of these books I mention.
So, and solve some problems. So, that he can think a long the class and understand things
faster, and also it is more it is very boring to introduce every small definition in the class.
So, that we can use the forty lectures available for more serious discussion, and then after
that we introduce the few notions like a vertex cover, then we told the minimum vertex
cover is the one with the minimum number of vertices in it. And another notion
independent set; the we talk to about the cardinality of the maximum independence set
that is called the stability number, the notation is alpha of G. And then we related these
two parameters alpha of G, and the cardinality of the minimum vertex cover we called it
beta of G is show that when you some then together we get the total number of vertices.
This is, because when you remove a vertex cover what we see is an independence set.
Similarly, therefore, when we remove a minimum vertex cover what we see is a
maximum independence set and vice versa; that is a reason for that. So, this summarizes
the lecture today. In the next class, we will look at matchings and then we will connect
the matchings - the notion of matchings with the vertex cover, and independent set
etcetera. That will be the aim of the next class. It would be better if the student can as I
mentioned go through some of the introductory material, in many of these text books; so,
that the next class will be much easier.

