(Refer Slide Time: 10:54)

So, let us see the corollary. This claim is that if U came out of the Q before V, then the d
Value of U cannot be greater than the d value of V. The second thing that I would like to
establish is that every time we assign a d value to a vertex, which was in the
neighborhood of U, we established U as its parent and d value is incremented by 1. So,
what happens is that, suppose this is V and this is U, then this has some d value alpha.
Then, this has d value alpha plus 1. Now, when U was assigned value alpha. It must have
been assigned a parent.
Let us call it x 1. The parents d value must have been alpha minus 1. So, if we go
backwards, every vertex except x has a parent. So, it will reach s and its d value is 0. So,
what you notice is that, just by walking along the parents of the vertices going towards
this, we find that we build a path from s to the vertex V. The d value has to be the length
of that path. The reason is that every time we walk along one edge backwards, we reduce
the d value and it reaches 0.
So, the d value is the length of that path. So, we can also have claim three. It is, where
exists a path from S to V with length d V for each vertex V. This implies a corollary,
which is d of V has to be greater than equal to delta S V for all V. Let me remind you
that delta S V stands for the length of the shortest path from S to V. Among all paths
from S to V the path which has got the minimum length, where length is this. This is the
length of some path from S to V.

So, this has to be less than or equal to this. Now, we want to prove the main result that
not only that this is greater than equal to this, but we will establish that this is equal to
this. The d V actually computes the shortest path from S to V. So, let us try do that. The
next claim four, is that for all V, how do we prove this? So, we will prove this again by
induction, but this time we will do induction on the delta value of that vertex. Each
vertex V has a delta S V value unique value.
We will prove this with the increasing value of delta. So, which vertex has got the
minimum delta value, exactly the value of S, namely delta S. S is 0. The d values can
never be negative because the only thing we do is we assign the d value of some vertex
plus 1. So, there is no reason for d value to be negative. So, it is the least now. So, this is
by induction on delta S V. So, the base case as we said is, when delta S V is 0. This is
true only if V is equal to S. The d value of S is independently set to 0.
Well, it is set to 0 with every vertex. The d value of S is never changed in the entire
algorithm. The d value of S is never changed. So, it remains 0. So, indeed for s this claim
is true. The d of S is 0 and delta of S is 0. So, base case is correct. Now, we want to
prove for other vertices. So, for induction step we will take any vertex V. We will take a
shortest path. So, let us say this is a shortest path, from S to V. In general, there could be
more than one shortest path.
So, I pick one of them. The length of this path has to be delta S V by definition. Let us
say, this is K. So, induction hypothesis is that the claim is true for every vertex V for
which delta S V is less than or equal to K minus 1. So, the induction hypothesis says d of
V is equal to delta of S V, for each V. If delta of S V is less than or equal to K minus 1,
this is the induction hypotheses. Now, I have a vertex, which has delta S V value equal to
K. So, we would like to prove that d of V is K. Then, we are done. So, how do I show
that?

