(Refer Slide Time: 45:08)

It will describe set of paths from S to every vertex which are shortest paths. So, we can
call this a rooted directed tree, rooted to indicate that there is a special vertex in this. We
could call this as root of the tree. All the edges are pointing away from the root and all
these paths are appropriate directed paths. They are the shortest paths. So, the algorithm
functions exactly the way it did in undirected case, but this time it will contain only the
vertices which are reachable in undirected sense.
Now, the last thing I want to describe is edge weighted graphs. The edge weighted
graphs can be expressed as this triple. This is again a set of vertices and set of edges.
Now we are talking in terms of undirected graphs, but we have a third entity which is a
function. In this context we are defining these functions as functions which assign a non
negative integer, which we call weight to each edge. So, you know we can think of such
graphs as two seven eight four nine twelve fourteen four and so on.
So, such a graph is an edge weighted graph and given this, we can again define the
notion of the weight of a path. So, something called a weighted path length. So, suppose
you happen to have a path four seven two, then weighted path length is nothing but 4
plus 7 plus 2 un weighted path length was 3. So, it is equal to 13. It is the weighted

distance from, let us say of vertex x to V which is denoted now by the minimum of the
weighted path lengths of all paths from S to V.
So, we have the similar parallel notions. Earlier, we had the shortest path length or the
distance which is defined without worrying about the weights. Now, we just take into
account the weights and once again note that if you have a path, let us say x 1 x 2 x 3 x 4
and so on, with weights alpha 1 alpha 2 alpha 3 and so on. If this is the minimum weight
path from this Vertex, to let us say x n, then from any sub path you pick any two
vertices. This has to be the shortest weighted path between these two vertices. If it was
not, then I can replace it. If it adds some cycles, you remove those cycles. You can find a
shorter path, may be lesser weight path from x 1 to x n. So, there is still there. So, final
thing is because of this property, there is still a well defined shortest weighted path tree
from every vertex. So, we can say that there exists a shortest weighted path.
